Indian Institute of Technology Patna (abbreviated IIT Patna or IITP) is one of the 23 IITs, located at Bihta near Patna, Bihar (India).[3] It is recognized as an Institute of National Importance by the Government of India.[4] It is one of the second generation IITs established by an Act of the Indian Parliament on 6 August 2008.[5] The permanent campus of IIT Patna is located at Bihta which is approximately 30 km west of Patna and has been fully operational since 2015.[6] IIT Patna's campus is located at Amhara, Bihta, 35 km from Patna at a 501 acres (203 ha) site.[7][8][9][10] The foundation stone of the IIT Patna, Bihta Campus was laid by Kapil Sibal in 2011.[11] IIT Patna started its new session (from July 2015) in its permanent campus located at Bihta. The campus at Bihta was inaugurated by Prime Minister Narendra Modi on 25 July 2015.[12][13][14][15][16] Earlier, the institute was operating from a temporary 10 acres (4.0 ha) complex in Pataliputra colony, Patna, in buildings which have been renovated and were previously used by the Naveen Government Polytechnic {NEW GOVERNMENT POLYTECHNIC PATNA -13}. This is the main building of the campus that can be viewed directly from the campus main gate. It houses all the administrative offices, the Central Library, the Directorate, offices of all the Deans and other officials.[17][18][19] The Department of Computer Science is evolving since the inception of IIT Patna in the year 2008 and employs researchers like Prof. Pushpak Bhattacharyya, Dr. Jimson Mathew, Dr. Arijit Mondal, and others. Other Departments like Electrical Engineering and Mechanical Engineering also reside within the aegis of the department. The major research areas of the department include Communications, Signal Processing, VLSI, Electric Drives, Power Systems and Power Electronics. The department has online access to IEL, Science Direct, Springer and other online journals. Software like MATLAB and GAMS are available with the department in order to accelerate the research. Instructional laboratories for Basic Electronics, Analog Electronics Digital Electronics, Digital Signal Processing, Embedded Systems, VLSI, Electrical Machines, Power Electronics and Power Systems are fully operational. All the academic lectures take place in the Tutorial Block. The five-storey building also temporarily houses the laboratories in Computer Science, Physics and Chemistry for the undergraduate students. It also has the Computer Centre of the institute with total 18 GBPS internet connections and adequate server infrastructure.[20] Laboratories in Basic Electronics, Analog Electronics, Digital Electronics, VLSI, Control, Instrumentation and Communication are also located in this building. The Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering is a newly established department, that was instituted in 2015 with the efforts of Dr. Sujoy Kumar Samanta, faculty of IIT Patna.[21] It is located in the Block-6 of the campus. The department accepted the first batch of undergraduate students in 2016 and presently has 9 faculty members.[22][23] The Block-6 houses research facilities for its faculty members in various research fields ranging from Clean fuel production, CO2 capture and storage, Pinch analysis, Microwave-assisted heating, Process modelling and simulation to Bio-resource engineering and Wastewater treatment. The department has also set up various laboratories for its undergraduate students including Heat transfer laboratory, Mechanical Operations laboratory, Chemical Reaction Engineering laboratory, Process simulation laboratory among many others.[24] The science block has classrooms, faculty rooms and laboratories for Physics, Chemistry and Mathematics. These include the material science research and optics research facilities of the Physics Department, the chemistry instruments and chemistry research facilities of the Chemistry Department and the computational research facility of the Mathematics Department. The Department of Humanities and Social Sciences is located in Block 1.[25] The department has also set up a Centre for Endangered Language Studies to work for the minor/ tribal/endangered languages of the state of Bihar and adjoining areas.[26] In addition, the centre aims to collaborate with the institutes and universities of the neighbouring states to work for minor/ tribal/endangered languages along the state borders.[27] The Mechanical Engineering Workshop building houses all the Mechanical Engineering Laboratories, viz. Basic and Conventional Manufacturing Lab, Advanced Manufacturing Lab, CAD/CAM Lab, Dynamics Lab, Fluid Mechanics Lab, Heat and Mass Transfer Lab, Instruments and Control Lab, IC Engines Lab, Material Testing Lab, Metrology and Metallographic Lab, Robotics Lab and Polymer Engineering Lab. All IITs follow the same organization structure which has President of India as visitor at the top of the hierarchy. Directly under the president is the IIT Council. Under the IIT Council is the board of governors of each IIT. Under the board of governors is the director, who is the chief academic and executive officer of the IIT. Under the director, in the organizational structure, comes the deputy director. Under the director and the deputy director, come the deans, heads of departments, registrar. The institute has the following Departments, which conduct research as well as provide education.[28] IIT Patna undergraduate programs include BTech and Dual Degree programs. IIT Patna awards Bachelor's degree in the following disciplines: Admission to these programs for 638 seats is through the Joint Entrance Examination (JEE)-Advanced,[37] taken by students seeking admission into the IITs after completing 10+2 years of schooling. The Curriculum consists of eight semesters spread over four academic years. A student takes five to six theory courses in addition to laboratory courses in each semester. A student's performance is evaluated based on a credit system. Credits are allotted to each course depending on the number of lecture/tutorial/laboratory hours per week. Admission in the institution is taken by competitive exams like Joint Entrance Examination (JEE), JAM.[38][39] IIT Patna postgraduate programs include: The M.tech program, started in 2012, awards degrees in following disciplines: Admission to M.Tech is through GATE after which an interview is held to screen the shortlisted candidates. Sponsored Candidates are not required to appear in GATE and are directly called for interview on applying for admission to MTech Program (if selected). Admission to the Executive MBA program is based on an application process followed by a merit-based selection for admission. Started in 2009, Phd degrees are awarded by all the departments. Requirements for admission into the PhD programs include a master's degree and prior academic achievement. Students undergo an interview before gaining admission.[43] Internationally, IIT Patna was ranked 351–400 in Asia in the QS Asia University Rankings of 2023. It was ranked 801 in the world by the Times Higher Education World University Rankings of 2023. IIT Patna was ranked 19 among Engineering Colleges in India by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2025 and 36 overall.[48] The Incubation Centre is supported by the Government of Bihar and the Department of Electronics and Information Technology (DeitY), Ministry of Communications and IT, Government of India. The Incubation Centre accepts applications for incubation multiple times a year. The applicants submit a 10-page business plan which is evaluated by the Project Evaluation Team, composed of eminent personalities from Industry, academia, government and investment community. Shortlisted applicants are called for a presentation before an expert panel. Based on the recommendation from the panel, the applicant are then offered admission to the incubation programme. The selected start-ups are fully supported and provided with all facilities including fully furnished office spaces, communication facilities, state of the art ESDM laboratory facilities, guidance by mentors from Angel Investors, Industry, IITP faculty, Investor Connect, Training and Development programmes, and other assistance required.[49] The groundbreaking ceremony for the permanent building facility of the Incubation Centre at the IIT Patna's Bihta campus was held on 24 November 2018.The Chief Guest for the ceremony was the Deputy Chief Minister of Bihar, Shri Sushil Kumar Modi.[50] A Class 1000 clean room (also known as ISO6 clean room), which utilizes high-efficiency particulate absorbing (HEPA) filtration system to maintain air cleanliness level of a maximum of 1,000 particles of more than 0.5 micron per cubic meter inside air, was inaugurated inside Incubation Centre on 13 September 2023 by the state information technology minister Mohd Israil Mansuri.[51] The International Relations Cell at IIT Patna is responsible for the entire institute's international activity. The IR Affairs office is committed to increasing international collaboration through exchange visits, and opening up international conversations by encouraging universities stakeholders to set up joint programs, joint research and projects, faculty exchange and internships for international students.[52] IIT Patna has collaborated with many foreign universities like National University of Singapore (NUS), University of Houston, Texas (USA), Louisiana State University (USA), University of Hartford, Connecticut (USA), University of Missouri, Columbia (USA), University of New South Wales(Australia), University of North Texas, Denton (USA) and University of Saskatchewan(Canada).[53] The MoU is intended to give opportunities to BTech, MTech and PhD students and faculty from IIT Patna to go to United States, Australia, Singapore and Canada and develop their research skills and interact with people working in different areas of science and technology.[54] The institute has set up many laboratories to conduct research in various disciplines of engineering, pure and applied sciences and humanities on campus. Research is carried out by faculty members and research scholars under the guidance of faculty members. Research work is also done at the undergraduate level usually in